I suspect that many of you who have
conscientiously studied up on the war in
Vietnam and just finally begun to get
that war in perspective must be appalled
at the thought of having to start all
over again with another war and all I
can say to encourage you is at the
present moment there aren't very many
experts on the war in Laos I know very
little about it myself but having
written something about it in ramparts
in January apparently that puts me up in
the forefront of the people who've been
seeing this looking at the war and of
course that's one of the main reasons
why the war is being fought in Laos at
this time that Nixon's interest in
getting the war on the back pages of the
newspapers in toning down protests has
turned to allow us for two reasons first
of all that primarily America is going
to fight an air war there instead of a
ground war which is fewer casualties on
our side although it causes horrible
casualties on the other side and
secondly Laos is an area where the news
correspondents cannot roam with the same
freedom that they have known recently in
Vietnam so it really is the same war
getnum is a ssin in vietnam means
stepping up the war in Laos and I think
the if that's a fairly cynical way of
assessing what Nixon wants I think the
best proof of it is the fact that last
October at the time when Nixon was
talking about Vietnamization air America
which is the so-called CIA air force or
air support paramilitary force in which
operates in Laos and elsewhere was
sending out letters to retired US Air
Force pilots and saying we are planning
to step up our operations in Laos this
incidentally was at a time when
ostensibly things looked very well for
the Americans in Laos there was no
particular crisis the Americans had just
recaptured the planned Asia all looked
well and yet it was clear that big
things in Laos were intended at that
time and in fact these letters were
going out to
people who had retired from the Air
Force way back in 1966 had been
processed for further action and had
applied to Air America but they had not
heard from our America from 1966 right
up until late 1969 so I think there is
no doubt about the intention to keep the
war going in Laos at the same time as it
is being cooled down in in Vietnam but
I'd like to talk a little bit about the
enormity of what is happening now and
then to show the kind of permanent
pattern in what's been happening and
this means going back into what is
unfortunately a very involved history in
Laos and I'll try to pick out just those
features which have a bearing on the
recent escalation because it's my thesis
that the what we have seen recently in
Laos the crisis that we have at the
present moment is the same kind of
crisis which happened repeatedly in
Vietnam in which France and I talked
about in our book the politics of
escalation that the war has been built
up recently in Laos as a result of the
real danger that savanna Puma might have
been able to achieve some kind of peace
in that country well the the permanent
pattern I am talking about is one which
goes back to the 1954 Geneva agreements
they have we have to go back to those
again I'm sorry and the of course the
American position nominally with respect
to Laos was different than it was with
respect to Vietnam with respect to
Vietnam
it did not initial the agreements did
not accept the idea of reunification but
it allows of course was reunified and a
government was set up and the question
was postponed to which the Americans
took no evident opposition the question
of integrating the potted Lao or
left-wing army into the Regular Army of
the Laotian government
at which time the question of
neutralization of Laos would have been
substantially completed there was
nothing that indicated that America
would object to the neutralization of
Laos itsudatte should have seemed like a
desirable goal savannah Puma was premier
in November 1957 13 years ago and he
made the mistake of achieving an
agreement with the his half-brother
Prince Savannah Vong who was the leader
of the palette Lao forces in Laos lotion
politics then were largely a princely
matter and the factions on both sides
were represented by the same different
branches of the same royal house the so
called vientiane agreements were signed
in november 57 which provided for the
peaceful reintegration of the patent lao
army into the royal Laotian forces and
this created some kind of consternation
in in Washington because it entailed
Suhana Vong coming into the cabinet and
there was typical of Laotian politics
actually a brief period where American
aid in Laos was being administered by a
patent Lao minister but America had no
intention of going along with that and
it's now recorded in quasi establishment
sources like Schlesinger and so on that
Savannah when Savannah Puma was forced
out of power in July 23rd 1968 it was
largely because of American fear at a
kind of neutralization which would
actually involve the other side
participating in power and that the
actual mechanics of it were also handled
by the Americans first the Americans
withheld aid to Savannah Puma and then a
right-wing faction in the Parliament
which was largely organized by the CIA
the CIA drone of colonel
no sivan back from Paris so that he
could take part in these operations this
right-wing CIA backed faction succeeded
in passing a vote of no-confidence and
Savannah Puma was out of power well in
the next in the in the the the next
months into 1959 or a period of
ascendancy of the right with the support
of American military aid which was
fantastic in those days in terms of the
of the entire total Laotian gross
national product we pumped something
like 300 million dollars into that
country in five years which worked out
to something like half the average
annual wage per per Laotian for the for
that period and the result was that the
the the the the economy of the country
was wrecked I don't think this of course
wasn't intended it was just the kind of
blind application of the the
determination on Washington's Park to
militarize a nation which had no
military instincts they all ended up
having one of the highest ratios of
police officers to the population in the
world although it also at the same time
had one of the lowest crime rates and
somebody pointed this out in a Senate or
House investigating committee which
found this rather surprising and it was
explained that of course the presence of
police officers in Laos didn't have
anything to do with the incidence of
crime in that country well in 1959 as a
result of all this the supposed
reintegration of the patent Lao army
which was into the forces did not take
place it was supposed to take place of
course into the forces are the unit of a
neutralist government but now there it
was no longer a neutralist government
and the pattered Lao faction had been
forced out of the coalition so the
patent law I made quite reasonably I
think under those circumstances declined
to be integrated into
ocean army they slipped away they were
surrounded by the Royal the ocean army
but they managed to get away and that
was the beginning of the great lion
crisis of 1959 which unfortunately is
very important to us still today because
that is the beginning of the the first
stage of the reopening of the Indochina
war the rien de China war in terms of
military operations really began in Laos
rather than in Vietnam and the in a very
real sense the American commitment to
Vietnam in 1961 grew as we shall see out
of the American intervention in Laos in
1959 I don't want to spend too long on
this because it is history and I did
write about it in ramparts in January
but essentially the American press was
swamped deluged with reports out of Laos
that there was a huge rebellion in that
country and that there was not only a
rebellion but an invasion and if I would
just give one just cite one report out
of many of the Washington Post which was
regarded that time as a liberal and
responsible newspaper reported that
there were 3,500 rebel troops including
large numbers of North Vietnamese who
had captured 80 villages in the
northeast sector of Laos that was a
typical story there were others that
were more extreme that said as many as
about four or five divisions of North
Vietnamese soldiers had come down into
Laos there was also talk of Chinese that
is to say troops of people's China in
Laos and a good deal of the sort of
image in this country today of Chinese
expansionism North Vietnamese
expansionism has been based on the image
which was created at that time of these
three or four thousand troops pouring
into Laos and capturing 80 villages well
that period has been written about in
histories it turns out it wasn't 80
villages that had been cat
shirred it was three villages from which
the occupying Garrison's had withdrawn
two of them had been briefly shelled for
a matter of hours and the third garrison
simply got scared as to the large
numbers of the four or five divisions of
North Vietnamese the UN sent an
investigating committee and they said
let us see your prisoners you say you
have some North Vietnamese prisoners
when the ocean government for weeks
refused to let them see the prisoners
then it turned out they only had seven
North Vietnamese prisoners and then it
turned out that in fact the North the
seven North Vietnamese prisoners were
not prisoners in the ordinary sense they
were people who had in fact had left
North Vietnam voluntarily in order to
join our side so that brought it down to
zero prisoners and that maybe seemed a
rather simple way of correcting the
image that was created at that time but
I think really that there was nothing in
it so far as a North Vietnamese attack
is concerned and that's very important
to remember because so much is being
said about 50,000 North Vietnamese in
layoffs today and I am not I I'm sure at
this stage there are some North
Vietnamese but I'm not at all convinced
that we're dealing with anything like
that number of people well I I rush
ahead because I want to talk mostly
about what's happening today but in 1960
as some of you may know sue vana Puma
was restored to power by what seems to
be in one of the few genuine political
movements in Laos in this whole period
the uprising of Kong lai who was a
relatively young paratrooper and who was
able to restore the Savannah Puma the
United States recognized Savannah Puma
said that it would support Savannah Puma
but meanwhile and this is very
characteristic at the same time that the
State Department was telling Savannah
Puma that we would support him hi
Defense Department officials and high
officials from sink pack the the combine
the commander in chief in Honolulu the
US commander in
went to fumino Sevan the CIA man and
said look we will support you if you
overthrow savannah puma and we did
support them and the proof that we
supported cumino savannah in a rebellion
is that air america started flying
supplies in at a great rate to Puma no
Savannah's rebel capital in the south of
lay us what the same time that the
Americans cut off military aid to the
officially recognized government of
Savannah Puma in the north of Laos the
result of that was that the Russians
also started flying in troops are not
true sorry not troops at all they
started flying in supplies to the
official government in vientiane to
match what the Americans were doing to
the rebel government down in Savannah
hit and this is when Eisenhower went out
of government and it looked as if we
might have a great power confrontation
over what was happening in Laos it is
clear there is no ambiguity about it the
initiative for a great power
intervention in that year was taken by
the Americans and that the Russians were
doing was responding in kind and they
were very careful to keep it that way
finally Kennedy came in and said we
can't win it wasn't that he really was I
think a peace lover in Laos so much as
he said he asked his Joint Chiefs can
you win and Laos and it turned out they
couldn't so he said all right I respect
him for this he said then we will we
will try to make peace and they did it
was in May the 3rd 1961 that a ceasefire
was agreed to in Laos and it was on may
the 4th 1961 one day later that Dean
Rusk announced that the situation was
very grave in Vietnam and that we were
going to increase Miller American aid
there immediately a day after that it
was announced that Lyndon Johnson would
fly out to Vietnam and
what nodine's IAM needed and so the
spotlight transferred from Laos to
Vietnam and in 1962 when finally the
Geneva agreements on Laos were signed
again the the scene shifted not only to
Vietnam but also at that time to
Thailand because that is the beginning
of our permanent presence and and
offensive presence in Thailand there is
if you look at these countries together
there is a kind of continuity a kind of
steady buildup which is more important
than the apparent kinds of date art and
peace which were reached for example in
1962 1964 Savannah Puma made another
mistake he again made contact with the
three factions because there was now a
neutralist faction in in Laos as well as
a right and a left faction and he was
making progress or at least he claimed
to be making progress in restoring a
truly neutralist government in Laos
again he was turned out of power in back
in 1964 and this time it's a bit
different from 1958 because nominally he
was restored to power almost immediately
in April 1964 but in fact the basis for
a neutralist coalition had been
destroyed because the neutralist army
had been subordinated to the right-wing
army and that is how the pattered Lao
managed to take the planned Asia in the
first place because the pandas are had
been occupied by the neutralist forces
of Kong Lai and when the nutrias forces
were subordinated to the right-wing army
many of the Nutri lists who are actually
occupying the plane I would not go along
with this and preferred at that moment
to side with the Patek Lao rather than
with the pro-american forces in
vientiane and that is attested to by
you essentially pro-american student of
Laos Denis Warner
so you see twice Savannah Puma had been
making progress towards neutralization
of Laos and twice he had been frustrated
as a by the people who wanted war or who
wanted confrontation in that country I'd
go straight now to 1968 because the same
1969 rather because the same scene
things seems to have happened last year
and seems to be what we are happening
what what is happening at the present
moment last May on May the 16th 1969 the
New York Times reported that Savannah
Puma had just met with the North
Vietnamese ambassador in Laos for the
first time in four years which is to say
for the first time since way back in the
6465 period and that these talks seemed
particularly important because the
Moscow had sent a high-level Foreign
Ministry official and it was speculated
that perhaps the Soviet Union was trying
to help bring about some kind of date
entrepreneur in Laos and Savannah Puma
made the surprising announcement that he
thought that perhaps the war in Laos
could be settled this was after he met
the ambassador he announced that there
are grounds for thinking that perhaps
the war in Laos can be settled before
the war in Vietnam despite the fact that
they are obviously linked and and so on
and the press speculated that the North
Vietnamese had offered to withdraw what
troops they have or a large number of
what troops they had in Laos if sivanna
could persuade the Americans to stop the
bombing in Laos and the time seemed
rather hopeful about this and the story
two days later was also rather hopeful
because it said they don't seem to be
any pattern Lao attacks in the country
the
only military initiatives being taken
right now are being taken by our side
well it was only about a week after that
that it was announced that a rather
extraordinary military initiative on our
part had succeeded in in capturing the
capital of the planned Asia eunkwang and
two days after that capturing a town
called ban ban which is the last big
town on the highway going into North
Vietnam in other words we'd pushed right
through to the North Vietnamese border
so clearly this was not the sort of
thing which was going to make it easy
for the talks of LaVon Han and Savannah
Puma to be fruitful in June the other
side showed that they were not in an
inferior position in that area they they
struck back in the opposite direction
and were able to capture an important
base on the west side that is to say the
the American side of the plain desire
and this was this capture was very
embarrassing because it turned out that
this base monks we had been chiefly
populated with American and Thai troops
no one is quite clear how many Americans
how many Thais speculated as many as
five thousand Thai troops now dressed in
Laotian uniforms in in layers but it was
clear that they were there this was
embarrassing to the Americans the
Americans the retaliated again and
reoccupied the planned Asia in September
but it has been said that the main
purpose in this reoccupation was to to
evacuate the population of the plan de
chartres and turn it into one of these
free-fire zones that France was
referring to where you can bomb anything
that moves and I should just remind you
that the number of air missions that are
admitted to in Laos which were supposed
to be in the order in outside this has
not been admitted but it would the
speculations about the number of
missions
air missions in Laos have risen from
about 1,000 a month in the beginning of
1969 to about 5,000 a month last fall
and on January 1st to this year the Far
Far Eastern Economic Review speculated
there may be as many as 20,000 missions
a month in Laos which far exceeds the
worst bombing of that terrible hitherto
unprecedented bombing of North Vietnam
so we recaptured the planned Asia and
the we've seen just recently in the last
weeks that the North Vietnamese have
taken it yet again there is nothing new
about this
they retaken the plan - are they retaken
once we situation is back to what it was
last June and essentially to what it has
been in that area ever since 1964 so
that in itself is not the crisis the
escalation has clearly come from our
side and it is clearly very alarming and
let me just point out one thing about it
that the press tends to overlook a lot
of people think that the interest that
we had when the planned Asia must relate
to our interest in the Ho Chi Minh Trail
going down through Laos into South
Vietnam and that this comes from the
understandable motive of wanting to
introduce supply lines and in as the
government likes to put it save the
lives of our GIS and South Vietnam but
that is nonsense if you look at a map of
Laos because Laos is like a huge frying
pan and the with the the pan end the
square pan and up at the north and the
Ho Chi Minh Trail goes down one side of
the handle and starts about a third of
the way down the handle and goes down to
the end of the handle whereas the plan
Bashar is up in the pan it is a long way
from the from the Ho Chi Minh Trail we
are much closer to the Ho Chi Minh Trail
in the Mekong Valley down at savanna
veteran places then we are at the plan
in the plan de chartres itself this is a
separate operation and the intensity
with which we are fighting it
is I think not
understandable in terms of the very
obvious military interest that the
Americans have in the ocean in the Ho
Chi Minh Trail now as to what as to what
our interest then can be in fighting
this war one can only speculate but my
own personal opinion is that if you look
at everything that has happened in that
area since about 1957 that you see a
pattern of apparent escalation followed
by apparent de-escalation x' whereas
underneath it there is a real continuing
pattern of an increasing US military
presence now it's a bit different now we
obviously are bringing troops out of
Vietnam but I think every one of those
troops that is being brought out of
Vietnam is being compensated for by an
increase in air power in that area and
that America wants very much to make
that air power credible and the only way
it can make that air power credible is
to use it this is the kind of hard talk
which generals use and that is the logic
which I think is pertaining in this area
as to why we should have such a
desperate interest in proving that we
can use air power in Laos which should
be perfectly obvious considering the
capacities of the American government
and the Thai and essentially peaceful
characteristics of the Laotian
country people in the cells all I can
say is the famous quote on the left
which some of you have heard before but
I think it's worth remembering at this
time this is from the vice president for
far eastern operations the Chase
Manhattan Bank speaking in the summer of
1965 which was right at the beginning of
the Americanization of the war under
Lyndon Johnson and he said in the past
foreign investors have been somewhat
wary of the overall political prospect
for the Southeast Asia region I must say
though that the u.s. actions and
this year which have demonstrated that
the US will continue to give effective
protection to the free nations of the
region have considerably reassured both
Asian and Western investors in fact I
see some reason for hope that the same
sort of economic growth may take place
in the free economies of Asia that took
place in Europe after the Truman
Doctrine and after NATO provided a
protective shield the same thing also
took place this is still Chase Manhattan
Bank man the same thing also took place
in Japan after the US intervention in
Korea removed investor doubts now you
see the advice this vice president of
Chase Manhattan has a slightly larger
vision and perspective that I have been
using because I have only been talking
about into China but he is talking about
the whole of Southeast Asia
doubtless he has in mind countries like
Malaysia and particularly Indonesia as
well and it's a very striking feature
that American investment in that area
which was rather dilatory and rather
small up until 1959 reached a sort of
take-off point in 1959 which is rather
paradoxical when you think about it
because that is the year that the
American press was filled with these
scare headlines about North Vietnamese
and Chinese massing to swoop down on the
area I don't want to belabor this point
but the an issue of Businessweek in
January of this year quotes a some kind
of Economic Committee complaining about
the investment the rate of profit on
investment in Latin America being only
12% whereas the rate of return on
profits in the Far East is 34% if you
think about that for a moment it means
that if you invest in Southeast Asia it
means you have a return total return on
your investment in three years and
everything after that is breathing and
the rate of investment in the Far East
has been steadily rising about 40% of it
is in petroleum which is as you know one
of the
best-paying returns on investment and so
without trying to fully to understand
what is happening in the Far East I
would simply say that without any doubt
there is a very real economic stake for
certain kinds of Americans in our
continuing to do what we do there for
the rest of us of course it is quite the
opposite and I for the laotians
themselves it is an unmitigated disaster
what has happened to their country and
it is terrible to go back now and read
the glib kind of confident remarks of
CIA men is quoted in the US press ten
years ago when they were asked what
you're trying to do say we are trying to
provoke a confrontation in this country
that is what a CIA man told a time
reporter ten years ago well they
succeeded and now today there are
something like a quarter of the Laotian
population is in resettlement camps we
have this as I say unprecedented kind of
bombing going on in a country which
never hurt anybody and as to what we do
about it I don't know but I I will at
this point hand the microphone over
you